Now Hari Sreenivasan takes a
broader look
at the problems lower-income
Americans face
when it comes to getting the
money they need.
HARI SREENIVASAN: South Dakota
isn't the only
place where payday loans are
such a big problem.
While a few states have banned
or imposed
strict regulations on these
fringe lenders,
they're ubiquitous in most of
the country.
In fact, there are more payday
lending storefronts
than there are Starbucks and
McDonald's combined.
In her book "How the Other Half
Banks," Mehrsa
Baradaran explores the booming
industry providing
financial services to the poor
at exorbitant
costs and offers some more
equitable solutions.
Thanks for joining us.
So, why -- where is this gap
created? And
why isn't there an incentive for
all banks
to reach out to all people with
money?
MEHRSA BARADARAN, Author, "How
the Other Half
Banks": The gap is fairly new.
So, starting in the 1980s, a lot
of community
banks started shutting down
branches in lower-income
areas, inner-city neighborhoods,
areas where
their profit margins were lower
than in other
areas. And so part of it is,
it's higher cost
to lend to someone or to take a
small deposit
than it is to get a big deposit.
Right? Your
overhead is the same whether
you're, you know,
taking in $100,000 vs. taking in
$500, but
your revenue off of that
$100,000 is much
higher than it is off of that
small deposit.
And so these banks started
leaving these areas.
And part of it is that the
government deregulatory
forces allowed them to merge and
form these
huge conglomerates such as Bank
of America.
So, as these banks leave, they
leave this
void for banking service. And
this is a void
that quickly is filled by these
fringe lenders,
so payday loans, check cashing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, when you
go through
certain cities, just like there
are food deserts
where you don't have a grocery
store, it seems
like there are almost bank
deserts, where
it's populated primarily with
these lenders
that you're talking about.
How much money is there to be
made?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It's an $89
billion industry
yearly. And it doesn't seem that
way.
So, when you go into these
neighborhoods,
these check cashers or payday
lenders, they
seem like neighborhood joints.
But they're
really sort of multinational
corporations.
They're large, very profitable
organizations.
And they have this, what I call
a facade of
informality, right? So it seems
as though,
look, they speak your language.
They're in
your neighborhood, but, really,
behind them,
there is a lot of bank
financing. These are
very sort of corporate, big, big
firms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: These
companies are going
to say, look, I'm taking a
greater risk. This
is a person that is not as
creditworthy as
someone who maybe walks into a
Bank of America
with a much larger amount of
assets, right,
so shouldn't I be able to charge
a higher
interest rate to get them this
money fast?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It is
certainly a higher
risk to lend to someone who's
low-income.
However, there's a lot of
studies to show
that the price that they're
actually charging
isn't the cost of the loan. It's
also fairly
misleading when you compare it
to the credit
markets that the middle class
and higher income
have access to.
And one of the big points of the
book is,
even assuming that this is a
market price
that they're charging and it is
the cost of
credit because of the risks and
the defaults,
et cetera, the rest of us don't
pay market
prices for credit.
The credit markets, whether it's
for our mortgages,
our student loans, any sort of
bank credit
you get is heavily subsidized by
the federal
government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The book is
called "How
the Other Half Banks."
Mehrsa Baradaran, thanks so much
for joining
us.
MEHRSA BARADARAN: Thank you.